Refactor description of span kind (#4178)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/trace/api.md

properties that benefit tracing systems during analysis:

1. Whether span represents an outgoing request to a remote service (CLIENT and PRODUCER spans)
   or a processing of request initiated externally (SERVER and CONSUMER spans).
2. Whether a Span represents a synchronous call. Spans that describe synchronous operations
   (SERVER and CLIENT) end after all its children complete under ordinary circumstances.
   It can be useful for tracing systems to know this property, since synchronous Spans may
   contribute to the overall trace latency. Asynchronous scenarios can be remote or local.

In order for `SpanKind` to be meaningful, callers SHOULD arrange that
a single Span does not serve more than one purpose.  For example, a
server-side span SHOULD NOT be used to describe outgoing remote procedure call.
As a simple guideline, instrumentation should create a
new Span prior to injecting the SpanContext for a remote outgoing call.

Note: A CLIENT span may have a child that is also a CLIENT span,
or a PRODUCER span might have a local child that is a CLIENT span,
depending on how the various libraries that are providing the functionality

> are built and instrumented. These scenarios, when they occur, should be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are built and instrumented. For instance, a database library might generate a CLIENT 
span when making a call to a server, and the underlying HTTP library used by 
the database library might also generate a CLIENT span.
These scenarios, when they occur, should be
```

I like your new text. Is it worth adding an example?

new Span prior to injecting the `SpanContext` for a remote outgoing call.

Note: A `CLIENT` span may have a child that is also a `CLIENT` span, or a
`PRODUCER` span might have a local child that is a `CLIENT` span,
depending on how the various components that are providing the functionality
are built and instrumented.

[Semantic conventions](../../specification/overview.md#semantic-conventions) for
specific technologies should document kind for each span they define.

For instance, [Database Client Semantic Conventions](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/database/database-spans.md)
recommend using `CLIENT` span kind to describes database calls.
If the database client communicate to the server over HTTP, the HTTP
instrumentation (when enabled) creates nested `CLIENT` spans to track individual
HTTP calls performed in the scope of logical database `CLIENT` operation.

These are the possible `SpanKind`s:

* `SERVER` indicates that the span covers server-side handling of a remote
  request while the client awaits a response.
* `CLIENT` indicates that the span describes a request to a remote service where

>   the client await a response.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  the client awaits a response.
```

## SpanKind

`SpanKind` clarifies the relationship between Spans that are correlated via
parent/child relationships or span links. `SpanKind` describes two independent
properties that benefit tracing systems during analysis:

> 1. Whether span represents an outgoing call a remote service (`CLIENT` and

Reviewer 2: this sounds a bit like messaging `receive` spans would fall under `CLIENT` since they are making a call to a remote service?

Author: oh, yes, that's right.  I think we need to bring it back to the messaging SIG. I think we should change it to `client` - https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/issues/1366

I believe the messaging semconv contradicts both: this PR and the current wording in the spec, so prefer to take it separately and don't block this PR on messaging discussion

>    `PRODUCER` spans) or a processing of request initiated externally (`SERVER`

Reviewer 3: Or

> or the processing of an incoming ...

>    `PRODUCER` spans) or a processing of request initiated externally (`SERVER`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   `SERVER` spans) or a processing of request initiated externally (`SERVER`
```

Shouldn't this be `SERVER`? 🤔

   and `CONSUMER` spans).
2. Whether a Span represents a synchronous call. Spans that describe synchronous
   operations (`SERVER` and `CLIENT`) end after all its children complete under
   ordinary circumstances. It can be useful for tracing systems to know this
   property, since synchronous Spans may contribute to the overall trace

>    latency. Asynchronous scenarios can be remote or local.

Reviewer 4: I don't think we should be emphasizing this aspect. OTEL span data model provides no guarantees of causality between child-end and parent-end events. It is not unusual for server span (child) to finish after client span (parent).

Also "synchronous call" is even more misleading term. `await callDownstream()` is not "synchronous" by most conventions yet can still be blocking for the parent span (blocking its completion, not its execution).

Author: I changed sync/async to 'request/response' and 'deferred execution' and added more details in the definitions of the kind. LMK if it helps. 

Blocking/one-way have other meanings that can be confusing too (e.g. someone can think about `await client.get()` as non-blocking  or 'one-way' as no-ack).

In order for `SpanKind` to be meaningful, callers SHOULD arrange that
a single Span does not serve more than one purpose.  For example, a
server-side span SHOULD NOT be used to describe outgoing remote procedure call.
As a simple guideline, instrumentation should create a
new Span prior to injecting the `SpanContext` for a remote outgoing call.

Note: A `CLIENT` span may have a child that is also a `CLIENT` span, or a
`PRODUCER` span might have a local child that is a `CLIENT` span,
depending on how the various components that are providing the functionality
are built and instrumented.

For instance, a database client instrumentations create `CLIENT` span that
describes database calls. If the database client communicate to the server over
HTTP, the HTTP instrumentation (when enabled) creates nested `CLIENT` spans to
track individual HTTP calls performed in the scope of logical database `CLIENT`
operation.

Such scenarios, when they occur, should be detailed in the semantic conventions

> appropriate to the relevant technologies.

Reviewer 4: > should be detailed in the semantic conventions

I am not sure what this phrase mean. Is there a link to an example we can provide?

Author: I rephrased it and added link to DB semantic conventions. LMK if it helps.

These are the possible `SpanKind`s:

* `SERVER` Indicates that the span covers server-side handling of a

>   synchronous RPC or other remote request.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  remote request.
```

* `CLIENT` Indicates that the span describes a synchronous request to

>   a remote service.

Reviewer 4: We can replace synchronous with a reference to request/response communication style (vs. one-way communication in producer/consumer).

Author: agree, changed to request/response and deferred execution.

I'm going to resolve this one and keep https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/4178#discussion_r1729625489 to discuss 'one-way' and alternatives

  When the context of a `CLIENT` span is propagated, `CLIENT` span usually
  becomes a parent of a remote `SERVER` span and ends after the `SERVER` span
  completes.

> * `PRODUCER` span describes the initiation of an asynchronous request. This

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* `PRODUCER` span describes the initiation of a one-way request. This
```

  initiating span will often end before the correlated `CONSUMER` span,
  possibly even before the `CONSUMER` span starts. In messaging scenarios with
  batching, tracing individual messages requires a new `PRODUCER` span per
  message to be created.
* `CONSUMER` Indicates that the span describes the receiving or handling of an
  asynchronous request.
* `INTERNAL` Default value. Indicates that the span represents an
  internal operation within an application, as opposed to an
  operations with remote parents or children.

To summarize the interpretation of these kinds:

| `SpanKind` | Synchronous | Asynchronous | Remote Incoming | Remote Outgoing |
|------------|-------------|--------------|-----------------|-----------------|
| `CLIENT`   |     yes     |              |                 |       yes       |
| `SERVER`   |     yes     |              |       yes       |                 |
| `PRODUCER` |             |     yes      |                 |       maybe     |
| `CONSUMER` |             |     yes      |      maybe      |                 |

> | `INTERNAL` |             |              |                 |                 |

Reviewer 4: what do we mean by "maybe"? In case of DB/HTTP CLIENT/CLIENT, isn't it also "maybe" for the DB span?

Author: refactored this table to match the terminology and properties introduced before (call direction and communication style)
